docs: add guide for working with syntax trees in TypeScript (#36)
unifiedjs/unifiedjs.github.io: doc/learn/syntax-trees-with-typescript.md

---
group: guide
title: Working with syntax trees in TypeScript
description: Guide that shows how to traverse, update, and create syntax trees in TypeScript
author: Christian Murphy
authorGithub: ChristianMurphy
tags:
  - typescript
published: 2020-06-09
modified: 2020-06-09
---

## Working with syntax trees in TypeScript

> This guide will introduce you to:

Reviewer: If you add a `### Contents`, the table will be automatically generated.

Author: good idea, added

* [The basic syntax tree types](#the-basics)
  * [`Node`](#node)
  * [`Literal`](#literal)
  * [`Parent`](#parent)
* [How to include syntax tree typings for a specific language](#the-languages)
  * [MDAST (Markdown)](#mdast-markdown)
  * [HAST (HTML)](#hast-html)
  * [XAST (XML)](#xast-xml)
* [How to traverse a syntax tree](#how-to-traverse-a-syntax-tree)
  * [`unist-util-visit`](#unist-util-visit)
  * [`unist-util-visit-parents`](#unist-util-visit-parents)
  * [`unist-util-select`](#unist-util-select)
* [How to narrow generic `Node`s to specific syntax types](#how-to-narrow-generic-node-to-specific-syntax-types)
* [How to build a syntax tree](#how-to-build-syntax-tree)
  * [JSON](#json)
  * [`unist-util-builder`](#unist-util-builder)
  * [`hastscript`](#hastscript)
  * [`xastscript`](#xastscript)

> ### The Basics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Basics
```

All unified syntax trees are based off [the **Uni**versal **S**yntax **T**ree (`unist`)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist).
Unist is a types only package available on npm at [`@types/unist`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/unist), and provides three interfaces which the rest of unified's syntax trees build on: `Node`, `Literal`, and `Parent`.

> #### Node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `Node`
```

```ts
/**
 * Syntactic units in unist syntax trees are called nodes.
 */
interface Node {
    /**
     * The variant of a node.
     */
    type: string;

    /**
     * Information from the ecosystem.
     */
    data?: Data | undefined;

    /**
     * Location of a node in a source document.
     * Must not be present if a node is generated.
     */
    position?: Position | undefined;
}

/**
 * Information associated by the ecosystem with the node.
 * Space is guaranteed to never be specified by unist or specifications
 * implementing unist.
 */
export interface Data {
    [key: string]: unknown;
}

/**
 * Location of a node in a source file.
 */
export interface Position {
    /**
     * Place of the first character of the parsed source region.
     */
    start: Point;

    /**
     * Place of the first character after the parsed source region.
     */
    end: Point;

    /**
     * Start column at each index (plus start line) in the source region,
     * for elements that span multiple lines.
     */
    indent?: number[] | undefined;
}
```

> #### Literal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `Literal`
```

Author: updated

`Literal` extends `Node` and adds a `value` property.
For example a Markdown `text` `Node` extends `Literal` and sets `value` to be a `string`.

```ts
/**
 * Nodes containing a value.
 */
export interface Literal extends Node {
    value: unknown;
}
```

> #### Parent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `Parent`
```

```ts
/**
 * Nodes containing other nodes.
 */
export interface Parent extends Node {
    /**
     * List representing the children of a node.
     */
    children: Node[];
}
```

#### Pulling unist into a project

> ```bash

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Install:

```bash
````

Reviewer: Same suggestions for mdast/hast/xast

Author: updated

npm install --save-dev @types/unist
```

> then import the types into a TypeScript file with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To import the types into a TypeScript file, use:
```

Author: updated

```ts
import type {Node, Literal, Parent} from 'unist'
```

> or into a [JSDoc TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro-to-js-ts.html) project with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To import the types into [JSDoc TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro-to-js-ts.html), use:
```

Author: updated

```js
/**
 * @typedef {import("unist").Node} Node
 * @typedef {import("unist").Literal} Literal
 * @typedef {import("unist").Parent} Parent
 */
```

### The Languages

> `unist` provides the building blocks for having consistent structure, but is often more generic than what we as developers and content authors want to work with.

Reviewer: Lot of complex words. Maybe there’s a better way to describe that unist provides abstract interfaces

> We want to work with a specific language like Markdown, HTML, XML, and others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to work with a specific language like markdown, HTML, XML, and others.
```

Author: updated

Each of these languages has it's own syntax tree standard which extends `unist` with more specific content types.

> Let's take a look at a few of Unified's compatible languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a look at a few of unified's compatible languages.
```

Author: updated

#### MDAST (Markdown)

> The [**M**arkdown **A**bstract **S**yntax **T**ree (MDAST)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#readme) extends `unist` with types specific for Markdown such as [`Heading`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#heading), [`Code`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#code), [`Link`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#link), and many more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [**M**arkdown **A**bstract **S**yntax **T**ree (MDAST)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#readme) extends `unist` with types specific for markdown.
Some examples are [`Heading`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#heading), [`Code`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#code), and [`Link`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#link).
```

Author: updated

```js
/**
 * @typedef {import("hast").Element} Element
 * @typedef {import("hast").Comment} Comment
 * @typedef {import("hast").DocType} DocType
 */
```

#### XAST (XML)

The [E**x**tensible **A**bstract **S**yntax **T**ree (XAST)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#readme) extends `unist` with types specific for XML such as [`Element`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#element), [`CData`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#cdata), [`Instruction`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#instruction), and many more.
A full list of node types can be found in the [XAST documentation](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#readme).
[Typings for XAST are available on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/xast) can be installed with a package manager.

```bash
npm install --save-dev @types/xast
```

then import the types into a TypeScript file with:

```ts
import type {Element, CData, Instruction} from 'xast'
```

or into a [JSDoc TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro-to-js-ts.html) project with:

```js
/**
 * @typedef {import("xast").Element} Element
 * @typedef {import("xast").CData} CData
 * @typedef {import("xast").Instruction} Instruction
 */
```

> ### How to traverse a syntax tree

Reviewer: Make this section more specific to typescript. There is already an in-depth article on tree traversal. So cross link to and from that: https://github.com/unifiedjs/unifiedjs.github.io/blob/main/doc/learn/tree-traversal.md

Author: linked to tree traversal guide

The callback will be called for each `Node` in the tree that passes the `Test`.

For example if we want to increasing the heading level of all headings in a Markdown document:

```ts
import remark from 'remark'
import type {Node} from 'unist'
import type {Heading} from 'mdast'
import {visit} from 'unist-util-visit'

const markdownFile = await remark()
  .use(() => (mdast: Node) => {
    visit(
      mdast,
      // checks that the Node is a heading
      'heading',
      (node: Heading) => {
        node.depth += 1
      }
    )
  })
  .process('## Hello, *World*!')

console.log(markdownFile.toString())
```

Or if we want to make all ordered lists in a Markdown document unordered:

```ts
import remark from 'remark'
import type {Node} from 'unist'
import type {List} from 'mdast'
import {visit} from 'unist-util-visit'

const markdownFile = await remark()
  .use(() => (mdast: Node) => {
    visit(
      mdast,
      // this checks both that the Node is a list and that it is ordered
      {type: 'list', ordered: true},
      (node: List) => {
        node.ordered = false
      }
    )
  })
  .process('1. list item')

console.log(markdownFile.toString())
```

> Or we could want on all links which are not HTTPS:

Reviewer: ungrammatical sentence

Author: good catch, updated

```ts
import remark from 'remark'
import type {Node} from 'unist'
import type {Link} from 'mdast'
import {is} from 'unist-util-is'
import {visit} from 'unist-util-visit'

remark()
  .use(() => (mdast: Node) => {
    visit(
      mdast,
      // this both checks the node is a link and checks the content of url
      (node: Node): node is Link => is<Link>(node, 'link') && !node.url.includes('https'),
      (node: Link) => {
        console.warn('link is not https', node.url)
      }
    )
  })
  .process('[link](http://example.com)')
```

#### `unist-util-visit-parents`

> Sometimes in addition to wanting to find a `Node` you also need to know the `Node`s higher in the tree, it's parents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes in addition to wanting to find a `Node` you also need to know the `Node`s higher in the tree, its parents.
```

Author: updated

[`unist-util-visit-parents`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-visit-parents) is similar to `unist-util-visit`, but also includes a list of parent nodes.

For example if we want to check if all Markdown `ListItem` are inside a `List` we could:

```ts
import remark from 'remark'
import type {Node, Parent} from 'unist'
import type {ListItem} from 'mdast'
import {visitParents} from 'unist-util-visit-parents'

remark()
  .use(() => (mdast: Node) => {
    visitParents(mdast, 'listItem', (listItem: ListItem, parents: Parent[]) => {
      if (!parents.some((parent) => parent.type === 'list')) {
        console.warn('listItem is outside a list')
      }
    })
  })
  .process('1. list item')
```

#### `unist-util-select`

> In some cases it can be useful to find a `Node` relative to nearby `Nodes`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases it can be useful to find a `Node` close to other `Node`s.
```

Author: updated

[`unist-util-select`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-select) let's us use [CSS selectors](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-select#support) to find `Node`s in a syntax tree.
For example in Markdown if we want to find all the `Paragraph`s inside `BlockQuote`s, we could:

```ts
import remark from 'remark'
import type {Node} from 'unist'
import {selectAll} from 'unist-util-select'

remark()
  .use(() => (mdast: Node) => {
    const matches = selectAll('blockquote paragraph', mdast)
    console.log(matches)
  })
  .process('1. list item')
```

### How to narrow generic `Node` to specific syntax types

Unified works with many languages, and can pull content from strings, from files, and from virtual files.

> In many cases unified doesn't know what specific `type` a `Node` will be ahead of time.

Reviewer: I think these two intro lines are superfluous backstory. I suggest removing

Author: removed

import {u} from 'unist-builder'

const mdast = u('root', [
  u('paragraph', [
    u('text', 'example')
  ])
])
```

#### `hastscript`

For working with an HTML AST (HAST) it can be more familiar to work with [JSX](https://reactjs.org/docs/introducing-jsx.html), [`hastscript`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/hastscript#readme) provide familiar syntax:

```tsx
/* @jsxRuntime automatic */
/* @jsxImportSource hastscript */
/* @jsxFrag null */

console.log(
  <div class="foo" id="some-id">
    <span>some text</span>
    <input type="text" value="foo" />
    <a class="alpha bravo charlie" download>
      deltaecho
    </a>
  </div>
)

console.log(
  <form method="POST">
    <input type="text" name="foo" />
    <input type="text" name="bar" />
    <input type="submit" name="send" />
  </form>
)
```

#### `xastscript`

Similarly for an XML AST (XAST). [`xastscript`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xastscript#readme) provide familiar syntax:

```tsx
/* @jsxRuntime automatic */
/* @jsxImportSource xastscript */
/* @jsxFrag null */

console.log(
  <album id={123}>
    <name>Born in the U.S.A.</name>
    <artist>Bruce Springsteen</artist>
    <releasedate>1984-04-06</releasedate>
  </album>
)

> ```

Reviewer: Guide abruptly ends. I’m missing somethings like Conclusion. Also a Further exercises / Further reading section would be good to have

Author: summary has been added

---
group: guide
title: Working with syntax trees in TypeScript
description: Guide that shows how to traverse, update, and create syntax trees in TypeScript
author: Christian Murphy
authorGithub: ChristianMurphy
tags:
  - typescript
published: 2020-06-09
modified: 2020-06-09
---

## Working with syntax trees in TypeScript

> This guide will introduce you to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will introduce you to using unist and unified with TypeScript.
```

### Contents

*   [The basic syntax tree types](#the-basic-syntax-tree-types)
*   [The Languages](#the-languages)
*   [How to traverse a syntax tree](#how-to-traverse-a-syntax-tree)
*   [How to narrow generic `Node` to specific syntax types](#how-to-narrow-generic-node-to-specific-syntax-types)
*   [How to build syntax tree](#how-to-build-syntax-tree)
*   [Summary](#summary)

> ### The basic syntax tree types

Reviewer: Does this section really explain the basics?

When I read “the basics” I’d think: here’s the bare minimum of what I need to know to get started as a beginner with types”. This section instead (quite nicely) explains unist in depth.

Perhaps we need a new (short, and maybe we can pull some paragraphs from the rest of the document) section for the basics here. Then have this section called `## unist (universal syntax tree)`. And “unwrap” The languages:

* basics
* unist
* mdast
* hast
* xast
* summary

Another idea: change the three `How to ...` sections into their own recipes, and link to them from here? What do you think?

Author: drafted a version of this at https://github.com/unifiedjs/unifiedjs.github.io/pull/37

Reviewer: Let a review there. I quite like that. Does it work well when the site is built locally too?

All unified syntax trees are based off [the **Uni**versal **S**yntax **T**ree (`unist`)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist).
Unist is a types only package available on npm at [`@types/unist`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/unist),
and provides three interfaces which the rest of unified’s syntax trees

> build on: `Node`, `Literal`, and `Parent`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All unified syntax trees are based off [unist (**uni**versal **s**yntax **t**ree)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist).
The core types are available in a types only package: [`@types/unist`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/unist).
The main type is `Node`.
Everything else extends it.
`Literal` and `Parent` are more practical types which also extend `Node`.
```

#### `Node`

Every unified extends `Node`, the syntactic unit of syntax trees.
Every `Node` must have a `type`, the type tells us what kind of syntax the node
is. For example in Markdown (mdast) `Node` will be extended to make different
kinds of content such a `Heading` or a `Link`, a `Paragraph` or a `Blockquote`
(among others). Each of these different types extend `Node` (sometimes
indirectly through `Literal` or `Parent`) and set `type` to a [string literal](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/everyday-types.html#literal-types)

> which uniquely identifies a kind of content (in TypeScript parlance a [discriminated union](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/narrowing.html#discriminated-unions)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Node` is the syntactic unit of syntax trees.
Each node extends `Node` (sometimes indirectly through `Literal` or `Parent`)
and set `type` to a [string literal](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/everyday-types.html#literal-types)
The type field tells us what kind of syntax the node is.
This field uniquely identifies a kind of content (in TypeScript parlance a
[discriminated union](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/narrowing.html#discriminated-unions)).
For example in Markdown (mdast) `Node` will be extended to make different kinds
of content such as a `Heading` or `Link`, which respectively use a `type` field
of `'heading'` and `'link'`.
```

A node also can optionally include `Data`.
Data is a dictionary/object which can store extra information and metadata

> which is not standard to a given node type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A node also can optionally include a `Data` interface at the `data` field.
This is an object (dictionary) that stores extra metadata which is not standard
to the node but defined by the ecosystem (utilities and plugins).
```

When a syntax tree is parsed from a file, it may include `Position`, which is

> information about the Node’s location in source file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a syntax tree is parsed from a file, it includes positional information:
a `Position` interface at the `position` field.
This describes where the node occurred in the source file.
```

```ts
/**
 * Syntactic units in unist syntax trees are called nodes.
 */
interface Node {
  /**
   * The variant of a node.
   */
  type: string

  /**
   * Information from the ecosystem.
   */
  data?: Data | undefined

  /**
   * Location of a node in a source document.
   * Must not be present if a node is generated.
   */
  position?: Position | undefined
}

/**
 * Information associated by the ecosystem with the node.
 * Space is guaranteed to never be specified by unist or specifications
 * implementing unist.
 */
export interface Data {
  [key: string]: unknown
}

/**
 * Location of a node in a source file.
 */
export interface Position {
  /**
   * Place of the first character of the parsed source region.
   */
  start: Point

  /**
   * Place of the first character after the parsed source region.
   */
  end: Point

  /**
   * Start column at each index (plus start line) in the source region,
   * for elements that span multiple lines.
   */
  indent?: number[] | undefined
}

```

#### `Literal`

`Literal` extends `Node` and adds a `value` property.

> For example a markdown `text` node extends `Literal` and sets `value` to be a `string`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example a markdown `code` node extends `Literal` and sets `value` to be a `string`.
```

More practical example (“text” is a bit vague, “code” is I think easier to grasp)

  value: unknown
}
```

#### `Parent`

`Parent` extends `Node` and adds `children`.
Children represent other content which is inside or a part of this node.

```ts
/**
 * Nodes containing other nodes.
 */
export interface Parent extends Node {
  /**
   * List representing the children of a node.
   */
  children: Node[];
}
```

#### Pulling unist into a project

Install:

```bash
npm install --save-dev @types/unist
```

To import the types into a TypeScript file, use:

```ts
import type {Node, Literal, Parent} from 'unist'
```

or into a [JSDoc TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro-to-js-ts.html) project with:

```js
/**
 * @typedef {import('unist').Node} Node
 * @typedef {import('unist').Literal} Literal
 * @typedef {import('unist').Parent} Parent
 */
```

### The Languages

`unist` provides the building blocks for having consistent structure, but is
often more generic than what we as developers and content authors want to work
with. We want to work with a specific language like markdown, HTML, XML, and
others. Each of these languages has it’s own syntax tree standard which extends
`unist` with more specific content types. Let’s take a look at a few of

> unified’s compatible languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The types provided by unist are abstract interfaces.
In many cases, you will instead use more specific interfaces depending on what
language you’re working with.
Each language supported by unified, like markdown, HTML, and XML, has its own
syntax tree standard which extends `unist`.
Let’s take a look at a few of them.
```

#### MDAST (Markdown)

The [**M**arkdown **A**bstract **S**yntax **T**ree (MDAST)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#readme)
extends `unist` with types specific for Markdown such as [`Heading`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#heading),
[`Code`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#code), [`Link`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#link),
and many more. A full list of node types can be found in the [MDAST documentation](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#readme).

> [Typings for MDAST are available on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/mdast) can be installed with a package manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[mdast (**m**arkdown **a**bstract **s**yntax **t**ree)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#readme)
extends unist with types specific for markdown such as `Heading`, `Code`,
`Link`, and many more.
A full list of nodes can be found in the [specification](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast#readme).
The types are available in a types only package: [`@types/mdast`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/mdast).
```

Install:

```bash
npm install --save-dev @types/mdast
```

To import the types into a TypeScript file, use:

```ts
import type {Heading, Code, Link} from 'mdast'
```

To import the types in [JSDoc TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro-to-js-ts.html), use:

```js
/**
 * @typedef {import('mdast').Heading} Heading
 * @typedef {import('mdast').Code} Code
 * @typedef {import('mdast').Link} Link
 */
```

#### HAST (HTML)

The [**H**ypertext **A**bstract **S**yntax **T**ree (HAST)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/hast#readme) extends `unist` with types specific for HTML such as [`Element`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/hast#element), [`Comment`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/hast#comment), [`DocType`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/hast#doctype), and many more.
A full list of node types can be found in the [HAST documentation](https://github.com/syntax-tree/hast#readme).

> [Typings for HAST are available on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/hast) can be installed with a package manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[hast (**h**ypertext **a**bstract **s**yntax **t**ree)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/hast#readme)
extends unist with types specific for HTML such as `Element`, `Comment`,
`DocType`, and many more.
A full list of nodes can be found in the [specification](https://github.com/syntax-tree/hast#readme).
The types are available in a types only package: [`@types/hast`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/hast).
```

Install:

```bash
npm install --save-dev @types/hast
```

To import the types into a TypeScript file, use:

```ts
import type {Element, Comment, DocType} from 'hast'
```

To import the types in [JSDoc TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro-to-js-ts.html), use:

```js
/**
 * @typedef {import('hast').Element} Element
 * @typedef {import('hast').Comment} Comment
 * @typedef {import('hast').DocType} DocType
 */
```

#### XAST (XML)

The [E**x**tensible **A**bstract **S**yntax **T**ree (XAST)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#readme)
extends `unist` with types specific for XML such as [`Element`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#element),
[`CData`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#cdata), [`Instruction`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#instruction),
and many more. A full list of node types can be found in the [XAST documentation](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#readme).
[Typings for XAST are available on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/xast)

> can be installed with a package manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[xast (e**x**tensible **a**bstract **s**yntax **t**ree)](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#readme)
extends unist with types specific for HTML such as `Element`, `CData`,
`Instruction`, and many more.
A full list of nodes can be found in the [specification](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xast#readme).
The types are available in a types only package: [`@types/xast`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/xast).
```

Install:

```bash
npm install --save-dev @types/xast
```

To import the types into a TypeScript file, use:

```ts
import type {Element, CData, Instruction} from 'xast'
```

To import the types in [JSDoc TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro-to-js-ts.html), use:

```js
/**
 * @typedef {import('xast').Element} Element
 * @typedef {import('xast').CData} CData
 * @typedef {import('xast').Instruction} Instruction
 */
```

### How to traverse a syntax tree

:notebook: consider reading the [introduction to tree traversal in JavaScript](./tree-traversal)

> before reading this section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:notebook: please read the [introduction to tree traversal in JavaScript](./tree-traversal/)
before reading this section.
```

Once you have a syntax tree, often through using a parser such as `remark` for
MDAST or `rehype` for HAST. You want to be able to do something with that tree,
often that includes finding specific types of content, then changing the
content, validating or linting the content, or transforming the content.
To do this we need to be able to traverse the syntax tree looking for content.

> Unified provides several type-safe utilities which can help with this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A frequent task when working with unified is to traverse trees to find certain
nodes and then doing something with them (often validating or transforming
them).
There are several type-safe utilities provided by unified to help with this.
```

#### `unist-util-visit`

[`unist-util-visit`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-visit#readme)
takes a syntax tree, a [`Test`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-is#use),
and a callback. The callback will be called for each node in the tree that

> passes the `Test`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
takes a syntax tree, a `Test`, and a callback.
The callback is called for each node in the tree that passes `Test`.
```

For example if we want to increasing the heading level of all headings in a
markdown document:

```ts
import remark from 'remark'
import type {Node} from 'unist'
import type {Heading} from 'mdast'
import {visit} from 'unist-util-visit'

const markdownFile = await remark()
  .use(() => (mdast: Node) => {
    visit(
      mdast,

>       // checks that the Node is a heading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // Check that the Node is a heading:
```

      'heading',
      (node: Heading) => {
        node.depth += 1
      }
    )
  })
  .process('## Hello, *World*!')

console.log(markdownFile.toString())
```

Or if we want to make all ordered lists in a markdown document unordered:

```ts
import remark from 'remark'
import type {Node} from 'unist'
import type {List} from 'mdast'
import {visit} from 'unist-util-visit'

const markdownFile = await remark()
  .use(() => (mdast: Node) => {
    visit(
      mdast,

>       // this checks both that the Node is a list and that it is ordered

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // Check that the Node is a list and that it is ordered:
```

      {type: 'list', ordered: true},
      (node: List) => {
        node.ordered = false
      }
    )
  })
  .process('1. list item')

console.log(markdownFile.toString())
```

Or we could warn each time we find a link which has a URL that does not use
HTTPS:

```ts
import remark from 'remark'
import type {Node} from 'unist'
import type {Link} from 'mdast'
import {is} from 'unist-util-is'
import {visit} from 'unist-util-visit'

remark()
  .use(() => (mdast: Node) => {
    visit(
      mdast,
      // this both checks the node is a link and checks the content of url

>       (node: Node): node is Link => is<Link>(node, 'link') && !node.url.includes('https'),

Reviewer: Hmm, I think we either need a different and better example, or fix the code:
- What about relative links, anchors, other protocols?
- This allows: `./https`

Depending on what the code should do, I would go with:

```js
try {
  url = new URL(node.url, base)
  if (url.protocol === 'http:') {
    // warn
  } else {
    // fine
  }
} catch {
  // fine
}
```

Author: I removed this example for now, this type of test is also covered by the `unist-util-is` example

      (node: Link) => {
        console.warn('link is not https', node.url)
      }
    )
  })
  .process('[link](http://example.com)')
```

#### `unist-util-visit-parents`

Sometimes besides to wanting to find a node you also need to know the
Node’s higher in the tree, its parents. [`unist-util-visit-parents`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-visit-parents)

> is like `unist-util-visit`, but also includes a list of parent nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes it’s needed to know the ancestors of a node (all its parents).
[`unist-util-visit-parents`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-visit-parents)
is like `unist-util-visit` but includes a list of all parent nodes.
```

For example if we want to check if all markdown `ListItem` are inside a `List`
we could:

```ts
import remark from 'remark'
import type {Node, Parent} from 'unist'
import type {ListItem} from 'mdast'
import {visitParents} from 'unist-util-visit-parents'

remark()
  .use(() => (mdast: Node) => {
    visitParents(mdast, 'listItem', (listItem: ListItem, parents: Parent[]) => {
      if (!parents.some((parent) => parent.type === 'list')) {
        console.warn('listItem is outside a list')
      }
    })
  })
  .process('1. list item')
```

#### `unist-util-select`

In some cases it can be useful to find a `Node` close to another `Node`s.
[`unist-util-select`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-select) lets
us use [CSS selectors](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-select#support)
to find `Node`s in a syntax tree. For example in markdown if we want to find

> all the `Paragraph`s inside `Blockquote`s, we could:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes CSS selectors are easier to read than several (nested) if/else
statements.
[`unist-util-select`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-select) lets
you do just that.
For example if we want to find all `Paragraph`s that are somewhere in a
`Blockquote`, we could:
```

```ts
import remark from 'remark'
import type {Node} from 'unist'
import {selectAll} from 'unist-util-select'

remark()
  .use(() => (mdast: Node) => {
    const matches = selectAll('blockquote paragraph', mdast)
    console.log(matches)
  })
  .process('1. list item')
```

### How to narrow generic `Node` to specific syntax types

Unified works with many languages, and can pull content from strings, from
files, and from virtual files. To work with a specific node type or a small
set of node types we need to [narrow](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/narrowing.html)
the type, taking the more general `Node` and doing type safe checks to get to a
more specific type like a `Link`. Unified provides several utilities to help
with this, and there are some TypeScript language features which can also help.

> Let’s take a look at `unist-util-is`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To work with a specific node type or a set of node types we need to
[narrow](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/narrowing.html) their
type.
For example, we can take a `Node` and perform a type safe check to get a more
specific type like a `Link`.
Unified provides a utility to help with this and there are some TypeScript
language features which can also help.
Let’s first take a look at `unist-util-is`.
```

[`unist-util-is`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-is#readme) takes a
`Node` and a [`Test`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-is#isnode-test-index-parent-context)
and returns `true` if the test passes, and `false` if it does not. It also is
a [TypeScript predicate](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/narrowing.html#using-type-predicates)
meaning if used as the condition for an `if` statement, TypeScript knows more

> about the type inside the `if`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`unist-util-is`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-is#readme) takes a
`Node` and a `Test` and returns whether the test passes.
It can be used as a [TypeScript type predicate](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/narrowing.html#using-type-predicates)
which when used as a condition (such as in an if-statement) tells TypeScript
to narrow a node.
```

Author: updated

For example:

```ts
import type {Node, Literal} from 'unist'
import type {List, Blockquote, Strong, Emphasis, Heading} from 'mdast'
import {is, convert} from 'unist-util-is'

// `Node` could come from a plugin, a utility, or be passed into a function
// here we hard code a Node for testing purposes
const node: Node = {type: 'example'}

if (is<List>(node, 'list')) {

>   // If we get here, node is List

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // If we’re here, node is List.
  // JavaScript knows this because of the test: 'list'.
  // TypeScript knows this because of `is<List>`
  // xxx
```

I think TS beginners (including me earlier) have a hard time understand what’s doing what.
In the `xxx` part I think we should explain that `unist-util-is`’s types are set up in such a way to make sure that `List` and `'list'` match and you’ll get a TS error otherwise. (but I’m not sure how to explain it best)

Author: added some commentary on how type matching works

}

if (is<Strong | Emphasis>(node, ['strong', 'emphasis'])) {
  // If we get here, node is Strong or Emphasis

  // If we want even more specific type, we can use a discriminated union
  // https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/narrowing.html#discriminated-unions
  if (node.type === 'emphasis') {
    // If we get here, node is Emphasis
  }
}

if (is<Heading>(node, {type: 'heading', depth: 1})) {

>   // If we get here, node is Heading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // If we get here, node is Heading. JS will know it also has a `depth: 1`, but TS won’t.
```

Author: I'm not sure I follow this comment. JSDoc+TS will know?
Or do you mean the value is 1 in JavaScript?

Author: added some commentary on how type matching works

}

// For advanced use cases, another predicate can be passed to `is`
if (is<Literal>(node, (node: Node): node is Literal => 'value' in node)) {
  // If we get here, node is one of the Literal types
}

// Reusable predicates can also be created using any `Test`
const isBlockquote = convert<Blockquote>('blockquote')
if (isBlockquote(node)) {
  // If we get here, node is Blockquote
}
```

### How to build syntax tree

When content needs to be created or added, it’s often useful to build new
syntax trees, or fragments of syntax trees. This can be easy to do with plain
JSON, unified also offers some utilities for building trees with hyperscript

> or JSX.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It’s often useful to build new (fragments of) syntax trees when adding or
replacing content.
It’s possible to create trees with plain object and array literals (JSON) or
programmatically with a small utility.
Finally it’s even possible to use JSX to build trees.
```

#### JSON

> Often a tree can be created with plain JSON, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most basic way to create a tree is with plain object and arrays, such as:
```

```ts
const mdast = {
  type: 'root',
  children: [
    {
      type: 'paragraph',
      children: [
        {
          type: 'text',
          value: 'example'
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

for some extra type safety this can be checked with the types for the given
syntax tree language, in this case MDAST:

```ts
import type {Root} from 'mdast'

const mdast: Root = {
  type: 'root',
  children: [
    {
      type: 'paragraph',
      children: [
        {
          type: 'text',
          value: 'example'
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}

> ```

Reviewer: I think the above two examples can be merged: it’s a TS guide, folks will want to use types

Author: merged

> #### `unist-util-builder`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `unist-builder`
```

For more concise, hyperscript (or [`React.createElement`](https://reactjs.org/docs/react-api.html#createelement))
like syntax, [`unist-builder`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-builder#readme)

> can be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It’s also possible to build trees with [`unist-builder`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-builder#readme).
It allows a more concise, hyperscript (similar to `React.createElement`) like
syntax:
```

```ts
import {u} from 'unist-builder'

const mdast = u('root', [
  u('paragraph', [
    u('text', 'example')
  ])
])
```

#### `hastscript`

For working with an HTML AST (HAST) it can be more familiar to work with [JSX](https://reactjs.org/docs/introducing-jsx.html), [`hastscript`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/hastscript#readme) provide familiar syntax:

```tsx
/* @jsxRuntime automatic */
/* @jsxImportSource hastscript */
/* @jsxFrag null */

console.log(
  <div class="foo" id="some-id">
    <span>some text</span>
    <input type="text" value="foo" />
    <a class="alpha bravo charlie" download>
      deltaecho
    </a>
  </div>
)

console.log(
  <form method="POST">
    <input type="text" name="foo" />
    <input type="text" name="bar" />
    <input type="submit" name="send" />
  </form>
)

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
When working with hast (HTML), [`hastscript`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/hastscript#readme)
can be used.

```ts
import {h} from 'hastscript'

console.log(
  h('div#some-id.foo', [
    h('span', 'some text'),
    h('input', {type: 'text', value: 'foo'}),
    h('a.alpha.bravo.charlie', {download: true}, 'delta')
  ])
)
```

hastscript can also be used as a JSX pragma:

```tsx
/** @jsx h @jsxFrag null */
import {h} from 'hastscript'

console.log(
  <form method="POST">
    <input type="text" name="foo" />
    <input type="text" name="bar" />
    <input type="submit" name="send" />
  </form>
)
```
````

- I believe TS doesn’t yet support the automatic runtime?
- JSX doesn’t allow multiple syntax trees / pragmas per file
- It’s not familiar to everyone, only showing the JSX example will lead some folks to thing `h` can’t be used without it

#### `xastscript`

Similarly for an XML AST (XAST). [`xastscript`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xastscript#readme) provide familiar syntax:

```tsx
/* @jsxRuntime automatic */
/* @jsxImportSource xastscript */
/* @jsxFrag null */

console.log(
  <album id={123}>
    <name>Born in the U.S.A.</name>
    <artist>Bruce Springsteen</artist>
    <releasedate>1984-04-06</releasedate>
  </album>
)

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
When working with xast (XML), [`xastscript`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/xastscript#readme)
can be used.

```ts
import {x} from 'xastscript'

console.log(
  x('album', {id: 123}, [
    x('name', 'Exile in Guyville'),
    x('artist', 'Liz Phair'),
    x('releasedate', '1993-06-22')
  ])
)
```

xastscript can also be used as a JSX pragma:

```tsx
/** @jsx x @jsxFrag null */
import {x} from 'xastscript'

console.log(
  <album id={123}>
    <name>Born in the U.S.A.</name>
    <artist>Bruce Springsteen</artist>
    <releasedate>1984-04-06</releasedate>
  </album>
)
```
````

### Summary

> *   Using TypeScript can make finding typos and bugs easier

Reviewer: I don‘t think this point is made in the guide

Author: removed
